Nordex case study by Tim (#42)
gis-ops/tutorials: case_studies/windpark_optimization_nordex.md

<p align="center">
<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/10322094/121474513-7940e080-c9c4-11eb-8c32-2261096f59fe.png" alt="countours" width="500"/>
</p>

At this point this graph merely knows about the elevation, i.e. shortest path algorithms will naturally avoid costly edges (steep!), so it's actually what we wanted to achieve. The reason behind is that large trucks loaded with heavy turbines will have a hard time to drive on them.

> On the other hand the terrain may enclose natural habitats, waterbodies or regions which additionally should be considered in the path finding between points on the map. While a lake will be a hard restriction, a rocky area may rather be penalised as it will be hard to build paved roads on. Any of these features can be described as areas which as overlays can spatially effect the base network by intersection causing a hard removal of the edge or an update of the edge cost.

Author: just another idea how explain it
```suggestion
However, other environmental factors also have to be considered when building roads, such as natural reserves and waterbodies. Generally, we can distinguish between areas which shouldn't be traversed at all (**hard restriction**, e.g. a lake) and areas which would be more costly to traverse (**soft restriction**, e.g. woods). After the intial road graph building, we can update the graph's edges accordingly: edges which would intersect hard restriction areas can be entirely removed from the road graph, while edges which intersect soft restriction areas can be penalized (or favored) by providing user-specified cost factors for each area type. 
```

<p align="center">
<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/10322094/121502297-515f7600-c9e0-11eb-8eca-cb6b4ccfc007.png" alt="countours" width="500"/>
</p>

> The last step in the preparation of the graph is to bake roads, such as jeep tracks, which already exist into the topology. These are carefully selected by the wind farm planners and as no actual building cost is involved, the cost can be neglected for this subset of edges.

Author: ```suggestion
The last step in the preparation of the graph is to integrate existing roads, such as jeep tracks, into the graph's topology. These are carefully selected by the wind farm planners and as no actual building cost is involved, the edge cost can be set to a minimal value, so that the path finding will prefer already existing roads.
```

## Algorithmic Approach

> Each wind turbine in the farm is planned and sits on top of the topology consisting of interconnected edges. The question at hand is where to build the roads to minimize the cost which is influenced by the elevation and length of edges. In graph theory one may directly think of a [minimum spanning tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimum_spanning_tree 'Minimum spanning tree') which connects all the vertices together, without any cycles and with the minimum possible total edge cost. The problem we are trying to solve is more specific as we looking at a subset of the vertices, i.e. we are looking for a minimum tree that spans the wind turbines. A solution to this problem is known and referred to as [Steiner tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steiner_tree_problem "Steiner Tree") which makes the problem NP-complete. Hence, there exists no known way to find a solution quickly, i.e. the time required to solve the problem increases rapidly as the size of the problem grows. With wind farms up to 50 kilometres in diameter and elevation models of 1 meter spatial accuracy the amount of edges amounts up to millions and millions making a "fast" solution given the Steiner tree approach unrealistic.

Author: ```suggestion
Each wind turbine in the farm is planned and sits on top of the topology consisting of interconnected edges. The question at hand is where to build the roads to minimize the cost which is influenced by the elevation and length of edges. In graph theory one may directly think of a [minimum spanning tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimum_spanning_tree 'Minimum spanning tree') which connects all the vertices together, without any cycles and with the minimum possible total edge cost. The problem we are trying to solve is more specific as we are looking at a subset of the vertices, i.e. we want to find the minimum tree that spans the wind turbines. A solution to this problem is known and referred to as [Steiner tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steiner_tree_problem "Steiner Tree") which makes the problem NP-complete. Hence, there exists no known way to find a solution quickly, i.e. the time required to solve the problem increases rapidly as the size of the problem grows. With wind farms up to 50 kilometres in diameter and elevation models of 1 meter spatial accuracy the amount of edges amounts up to hundreds of millions making a "fast" solution given the Steiner tree approach unrealistic.
```

> If we knew where to start, we could step by step connect each wind turbine to our solution. Access points to the rescue. These are entry positions, which could be primary roads, sitting at the periphery of our network. The challenge is to be able to iteratively connect them with each other the cheapest possible way. For the sake of clarity, let's imagine 3 planned turbine positions (`wt1`, `wt2` & `wt3`) in a wind farm and one access point (ap) we want to build roads to. To determine the cost for these, we can make use of routing computations which will individually yield the accumulative cost to get there (depicted in the cells of the following table).

Author: ```suggestion
If we knew where to start, we could step by step connect each wind turbine to our solution. Access points to the rescue. These are entry positions, which could be existing roads, sitting at the periphery of our network. The challenge is to be able to iteratively connect them with each other in the cheapest possible way. For the sake of clarity, let's imagine 3 planned turbine positions (`wt1`, `wt2` & `wt3`) in a wind farm and one access point (ap) we want to build roads to. To determine the cost for these, we can make use of routing computations which will individually yield the accumulative cost to get there (depicted in the cells of the following table).
```

|    | wt1 | wt2 | wt3 |
|----|-----|-----|-----|
| ap |17   | 15  | 10  |

Turbine `wt3` is the closest turbine to the access point with a total cost of 10, so we can pop it from the queue and continue our quest to connect the next turbine.

|     | wt1 | wt2 |
|-----|-----|-----|
| ap  | 17  | 15  |
| wt3 | 4   | 2   |

> Grabbing the minimum once again from this matrix we will add the connection between the source `wt3` and destination `wt2`.

Author: ```suggestion
Grabbing the minimum once again from the remaining unsettled turbine locations `wt1` and `wt2` to the settled `ap` and `wp3`, the next road will be built from`wt2` to `wt3`.
```

|     | wt1 |
|-----|-----|
| ap  | 17  |
| wt3 | 4   |
| wt2 | 8   |

Finally, we connect the last turbine `wt1` to `wt3` to our cheapest possible road network.

<p align="center">
<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/10322094/121700012-c5c51280-cacf-11eb-96c5-93c7177fc602.png" alt="countours" width="700"/>
</p>

> With each added connection to our result set we can go one step further and update those edges which have been traversed in that search. Translating this to the real world means that these roads will have already been built, i.e. the cost for construction can drop to 0 again. In our example nothing would change in this scenario, however if we would add additional turbines on top of a realistic topology consisting of millions of edges, things may look different.

Author: ```suggestion
In each iteration we can go one step further and update those edges which have been traversed in the previous search. Translating this to the real world means that these roads will have already been built, i.e. the cost for construction can drop to 0 again. In our example nothing would change in this scenario, however if we would add additional turbines on top of a realistic topology consisting of millions of edges, things may look different.
```

## Opportunities for Optimisation

> In the course of this project a few promising ideas evolved in terms of optimising the process in terms of speed. Given a wind farm project of tens of kilometers in diameter with a detailed terrain model we see room for opportunity in different areas.

Author: ```suggestion
In the course of this project a few promising ideas evolved to optimize the process in terms of performance. Given a wind farm project of tens of kilometers in diameter with a detailed terrain model we see room for improvement in different areas.
```
